# Απομαγνητοφώνηση

## 00:03:40 - 00:11:40

Thanks very much Catherine and thanks to Martin Wayland and Martin Lucy for inviting me to give talk today. The occasion for the talk is I think the first sonic intervention into the Barnes collection a piece by Andrew Honick called Θnbounded Ηistories, which I haven’t yet got the chance to experience of tomorrow.                         

But one of the things, I think, that pieces are understanded. Hightslights is the fact that sound can maintain a very sort of powerful presence in the space without sort of leaving a trace and without sort of remaining invisible.  So these are the things I’m gonna talk about a little bit today.  

What I wanna do is give an overview of what’s called sound art and I’ll talk a little bit about that in a moment and to consider some of its historical and contemporary, so I’m gonna talk, I’m gonna give a broad overview and then I’ll look at some sort of contemporary versions of the things that today go under that name. So before I begin I wanna lay out two     . First, sound art. That term is a thorny label, it’s a label about which many artists and some curators and credits   have misgivings. These reservations were sort of blankly  voiced   by sound installation pioneer that I will come across later on in the talk Max Neuhaus, who was writing a catalogue essay, actually a wall text for an exhibition in New York in 2000. And despite the fact that he was conscripted under this..as a sort of example of sound art. He declared, you know..sound art that .. dismissed the phrase, sound art as a category mistake. His analogy was : it’s a damage title as grouping together still sculpture and still guitar music and calling something still art. Right? It’s just that too many things falling under that category and it’s kind of no sense … term.   

So this brings me to the second caviar which is that an enormous number of things goes under this title. Some people call it electronic music, sound art, installations, sculptures, paintings, drawings. We’ll come across all those things in a minute. And so the question is: what constitutes.. what is this thing if so many things fall under its name. How was it to distinguish it from other things that make sound, sonic things. How was distinquish it from other sort of .. and practices in visual arts. So I’m gonna try to respond to these words, not directly but as we go on. Let me just say initially that I don’t think there is any sort of.. I don’t take sound art as if to be a ….. that is distinguishable from music and any kind of regress  way. I do think though that it helps to label something and make distinctions in the same way that say that  distincition between theater and performance, which again there is no way regress distinction between these two, but I think it marks out to helpful.. helpful difference. And I also think that.. as we see.. at least.. as I hope we see that I think it points to something interesting that happen over the course of the 21st century in relationship between music and sound. And.. so to me, it points to some important differences that however are not sort of clean and hard and fast. And I suppose that the last caviar ?? that I give is that I’m gonna kind of like.. Sort of the …. History and I’m gonna play a bunch of little things. Nothing for very long, that I could drive some of you crazy. Maybe some of you ‘ ll be really happy with some of the things I present quickly. But If you wanna talk more in any of these things more, we we can do that at the end. So let me.. I’m gonna go to.. Before I begin with sound art proper, I think it’s important to give some kind of pre history.. Partly, because really important things prepare the way for what it’s called sound art. It’s often said to begun in the 60’s with figures like Magnan, Max Neuhaus and Lucier. So I wanna begin way earlier.. I wanna begin with… Edison back in 1878 and the reason for this is, first of all sound recording, the art of sound recording and this is the second.. I think.. variations of his photograph. Sound recording made it possible to install sound, to have sound be something that cound take place in a space without performers. Right? Now again.. some sound artists are perfectly performative but a lot of what I’ve been talking about has to do with a kind of installation practice that sort of ..is a kind of alternative recording.  

The other thing that I think it is really important.. this is kind of crucial to this history is that.. I think this is obvious when I think about it.. but it really had a profound impact on history and sound and music in the 20th century. And that’s that the sound recording allowed.. It didn’t distinguish among the variety of sounds that could be heard, right? So that sound, recording sounds, phonograph and audio recording could register the sound of a voice, the sound of a piano, the sound of a bird song, of machines, of wind.. all of these things were..so the recording app made no distinction among them, which is really crucially important.. for how artists came to think about.. sound and its relationship to music. Okay?  

That artist pretty quickly register this fact that none musical sound could be received and appreciated aesthetically.. One of the earliest and most important of these was Luigi Russolo who in this great 1930 manifesto, the Art of Noises, called on and of course Russolo was a feauturist painter, not in fact the composer, but a painter.. And if you know anything abouot the feauturists, the were big into large grand scale proclamations and of relagating all of the past that has been in the history.. So Russolo said you know that the contemporary orchestra is useless… the traditional musical instruments are worthless.. now we need a new art form.. I’m gonna call this the art of noises.. we need new instruments to make that happen.. So in this text.. in this manifesto.. This is the longest quotations I have.. I’ll just quickly read it. So, musical sound is too limited in its variety of timbres. We must break out of this limited circle of sounds and conquer the infinite variety of noise sounds. Let us cross a large modern capital with our ears more sensitive than our eyes. We will delight in distinguishing the eddying of water or air or gas in metal pipes, the muttering of meters that breath and pulse with an indisputable animality
